# TEA Use Cases

An overview of use cases to consider for the Transparency Exchange API. The use cases are marked with a short code for
reference. All use cases needs a story like "Alice has bought a..."

The use cases are divided in two categories:

- Use cases for **customers** (end-users, manufacturers) to find a repository with Transparency Artefacts for a single
  unit purchased
- Use cases where there are different **products**
  - This applies after discovery where we need to handle various things a customer may buy as a single unit

## Customer focused use cases

### C1: Consumer: Automated discovery based on SBOM identifier

As a consumer that has an SBOM for a product, I want to be able to retrieve VEX and VDR files automatically both for
current and old versions of the software. In the SBOM the product is identified by a PURL or other means (CPE, â€¦)

### C2: Consumer: Automation based on product name/identifier

As a consumer, I want to download artifacts for a product based on known data. A combination of manufacturer, product
name, vendor product ID, EAN bar code or other unique identifier. After discovering the base repository URL I want to be
able to find a specific product variant and version.

If the consumer is a business, then the procurement process may include delivery of an SBOM with proper identifiers and
possibly URLs or identifiers in another document, which may bootstrap the discovery process in a more exact way than in
the case of buying a product in a retail market. Alice bought a gadget at the gadget store that contains a full Linux
system. Where and how will she find the SBOM and VEX for the gadget?

### C3: Consumer: Artifact retrieval

As a consumer, I want to retrieve one or more supply chain artifacts for the products that I have access to, possibly
through licensing or other means. As a consumer, I should be able to retrieve all source artifacts such as xBOMs,
VDR/VEX, CDXA, and CLE.

### C4: Consumer: Summarized CLE

As a consumer, I want the ability to get the current lifecycle values for a given product. A CLE captures all lifecycle
events over time, however, there is a need to retrieve only the current values for things like product name, vendor
name, and milestone events.

### C5: Consumer: Insights

As a consumer, I want the ability to simply ask the API questions rather than having to download, process, and analyze
raw supply chain artifacts on my own systems. Common questions should be provided by the API by default along with the
ability to query for more complex answers using the Common Expression Language (CEL).

_NOTE_: Project Hyades (Dependency-Track v5) already implements CEL with the CycloneDX object model and has proven that
this approach works for complex queries.

### D1: Developer/PM - Components for inclusion in products by other projects/developers

A developer needs a component - software, library (open source and/or proprietary) to include in a product - publicly
available (may be commercial) or in an internal system. Developer can be individual, company or public sector. They need
insight into the library or component and be able to automatically keep upstream artefacts up to date.

### B1: Business consumer

Acme LLC buys 3 000 gadgetrons from Emca LTD to be distributed over a retail chain. Acme runs an in-house vulnerability
management system (Dependency Track) to manage SBOMs and download VEX files to check for vulnerabilities. Acme has
products from exactly 14.385 vendors in the system. How will their systems get continuous access to current and old
documents - attestations, SBOM, VEX and other files?

### E1: Third party: Regulators

Alice & Bob Enterprises AB has gotten a EUCC certification to get their Whola Firewall certified for CRA-compatible CE
labeling. In order to maintain the certification the certifying body needs access to SBOM and VEX updates from A&BE in
an automated way.

### E2: External potential customer - insights before purchase

Palme Auditors INC wants to buy the ACME SWISH product from a vendor. They want to examine vulnerability handling and
get some insights into the products before making a decision.

### E3: Hacker or competition

There are non-customers and not-to-be-customers that wants to get insight into how a product is composed by getting the
transparency docs.

### E4: Open Source user

Palme Inc considers using the asterisk.org open source telephony PBX. They need to make an assessment before starting
tests and possible production use. The can either use the Debian package, the Alpine Linux Package or build a binary
themselves from source code. How can they find the transparency exchange data sets?

### O1: Open Source project

The hatturl open source project publish a library and a server side software on Github. This is later packaged as
packages in many Linux distributions.

How does the project publish artefacts? What are the requirements?

## Product focused use cases

### P1: A standalone app

Customer buys a standalone application that is delivered as a binary

### P2: A OCI container

Customer gets a container with many third party components and a binary software developed by the manufacturer

### P3: Embedded system

### P4: Package with many devices

### P5: An Open Source software library
